you're telling me that that will have an
impact absolutely and the studies prove
it it's an amazing ingredient that's
been used for its health benefits for
example it has impact on visceral fat
and that belly fat yeah it's the fat
that's really bad for
you yeah you're not supposed to do that
Stephen oh gosh the glucose goddess is
back Jesse enpay is a biochemist and
best-selling author with a focus on
nutrition and glucose management she
provides simple science-backed tips to
improve our health 80% of the population
have glucose spikes every single day and
that's when problems start happening
from mental health to acne to faster
aging infertility and PCOS which is one
of the leading causes of infertility in
women and the problem is we're in a
situation where the food landscape is so
toxic and most of us just eat sugar and
starches but they're literally made up
of glucose molecules is there any such
thing as good sugar no so even all the
fruit that we find today in supermarkets
is not natural some people believe that
if the sugar is coming from a fruit for
example in a fruit smoothie that's good
sugar but that's a total lie and your
body doesn't differentiate but the sugar
isn't a fruit smoothie or the sugars in
a chocolate cake are there any foods
that have surprised you when you tested
them yes I think the biggest ones are
wow this begs the question then is there
a healthy way to consume sugar so these
are four hacks that people can Implement
in their lives and you're able to reduce
your glucose spikes while still eating
what you love and you took these hacks
and did an experiment yes and 90% of
people reduce their Cravings really
significant impacts on sleep hormones
mood on diabetes and it says roughly 40%
of people who wanted to lose weight did
in fact lose weight yep so what are the
hacks the first one
is this is a sentence I never thought
I'd say in my life um we've just hit 7
million subscribers on YouTube and I
want to say a huge thank you to all of
you that show up here every Monday and
Thursday to watch our conversations um
from the bottom of my heart but also on
behalf of my team who you don't always
get to meet there's almost 50 people now
behind the dire of a SE that worked to
put this together so from all of us
thank you so much um we did a raffle
last month and we gave away prizes for
people that subscribed to the show up
until 7 million subscribers and you guys
love that raffle so much that we're
going to continue it so every single
month we're giving away money can't buy
prizes including meetings with me
invites to our events and ,000 gift
vouchers to anyone that subscribes to
the dire CE there's now more than 7
million of you so if you make the
decision to subscribe today you can be
one of those lucky people thank you from
the bottom of my heart let's get to the
[Music]
conversation Jesse in chasby the glucose
goddess we spoke two years ago and in
that time I feel like there's been a
real glucose Revolution much of which
has been led by you your books have sold
millions and millions and millions of
copies around the world your
conversations online have millions and
millions and millions and millions of
views more than I could possibly
count what's going on with glucose the
thing is glucose has always been
incredibly important to our health but
it's been going on behind the scenes but
now now but with the technology that we
have glucose monitors new science we're
actually able to get a real good handle
on it and understand our diet through
that lens so most of us Stephen have
unhealthy glucose levels to give you an
example one billion people in the world
have either type two diabetes or
pre-diabetes one billion and that number
is increasing every single day and then
in people who don't have any health
issues up to 80% of the population still
has glucose spikes every single day and
this leads to lots of symptoms from
mental health problems to fertility to
acne to faster aging glucose is really
important and I'm really happy that
we're talking about it more what have
you have you been surprised by how much
people have woken up to glucose sugar
yeah definitely I think even the word
glucose people used to know blood sugar
but now the fact that people know what
glucose is makes me quite happy that's
the scientific way to refer to blood
sugar it's surprising but the thing is
like I'm on the inside I'm working every
single day to make sure people know what
glucose is so it's like you know when
you put the frog in the water and then
you slowly boil the water you know that
image and the Frog doesn't notice the
water is boiling that's how I feel
because I've been doing this for five
years now so I can tell now if I compare
today to five years ago there's been a
huge shift but I've been looking at it
every single day day by day and the
increase has been very gradual how do
you define yourself there's this sort of
name you go under the glucose goddess
but professionally if someone says what
you do H how do you define that I say
I'm a biochemist I'm a biochemist
passionate about sharing science in a
fun accessible sexy way that's what I
like to do these cgms continuous glucose
monitors that everybody seems to be
wearing these days they're much of the
the reason people I guess know you
because you post these incredible graphs
on your Instagram showing the impact
that of the things we on our glucose
levels yeah I want to start there when I
eat something sweet and full of sugar
there's a spike in my CGM so my
continuous glucose monitor does does the
spike mean that something bad is going
on in my body kind of yeah so I'll go
just one step back there's lots of
different categories of foods but there
are two that impact our blood sugar
levels it's starches so that's bread
rice pasta potatoes oats and sugars so
anything sweet from an apple pie turn
orange juice these two categories of
foods they're literally made up of
glucose molecules so when you eat them
they break down into individual glucose
molecules and the glucose molecules
arrive into your blood if you eat a lot
of starches and sugars at once a lot of
glucose molecules are arriving into your
blood and that's what you see that's the
spike you see on your glucose monitor
now these Spikes have a few different
consequences you know having a few
spikes here and there is not not a big
deal but if you have really big spikes
which I think most of us are discovering
we have even if we don't have diabetes
that's when problems start happening
there's basically three processes that
take place in your body when you spike
it's chronic fatigue of your
mitochondria aging glycation and then
insulin release and I can go into detail
into these but these are what underpin
all the negative consequences of glucose
spikes so start with that first one okay
the mitochondria so there's these little
factories in your cells that are in
charge of making energy you must have
learned this at school you know the
mitochondria is the factory of the cell
these little mitochondria are constantly
trying to make energy for your body and
they turn glucose into energy so you
give them glucose through food they turn
it into energy and then your brain uses
the energy your heart to pump your ears
to listen your eyes to see your whole
body uses this energy and so you might
think okay I want lots of energy so I
should give my mitochondria lots of
glucose That's The Logical conclusion
you might come to but that where it
completely collapses see biology is a
bit weird take the example of a plant do
you have any plants at home I do yeah
okay are you able to keep them alive um
my cleaning does a great job of keeping
all them alive I have a super hard time
but the reason I'm bringing up plants is
because you know that plants need some
water to live but if you give them too
much water they drown and they die the
human body is kind of the same some
glucose amazing steady energy too much
glucose and your little mitochondria
start freaking out out they get
overwhelmed by too much glucose Reviving
their way they kind of go on strike and
I'm French so I know but they sort of go
on strike and they get overwhelmed and
stressed out and they're not able to
make energy effectively anymore because
we're overloading them with too much
glucose to process and as a human what
do you feel you feel chronic fatigue you
wake up you're exhausted thinking of
going to the grocery store or picking up
your kids is super tiring there's this
Energy System in your body is just kind
of of broken but you keep eating carbs
you know croissant some bread something
sweet but you keep being more and more
tired that's your mitochondria
dysfunctioning so that's the first thing
that happens when you spike you get
tired your mitochondria gets stressed
out and one thing that's interesting is
that sometimes when we eat something
sweet especially in the morning like an
orange juice we kind of feel a sense of
like a like a rush of energy you know
you have a big glass of orange juice and
you sort of perk up for a sec most
people think that that is energy what's
actually going on is that Sugar releases
dopamine in the brain and it's the
pleasure molecule it's the same molecule
that gets released when you have sex
when you play video games when you do
illegal drugs sugar releases dopamine
it's pleasure it makes you kind of feel
awake just briefly but actually that's
not energy because on the inside your
mitochondria are being damaged so we're
being tricked by sugary foods and when
we're tired we often reach for something
sugary to per us up but it doesn't work
on the inside so that's the first thing
your mitochondria gets stressed out and
as your mitochondria gets stressed out
they also release what's called free
radicals which is something that
increases inflammation in the body and
inflammation is really nasty thing we'll
get to it in a sec the second thing that
happens when you spike has to do with a
chicken cooking in the oven so if you
put you're looking at me weird but let
me explain if you put a chicken in the
oven it goes from pink to brown right
you've seen this it books this process
of cooking is called glycation it's the
process of Browning or of cooking same
thing when you toast a piece of toast
for
example the interesting thing is a human
being from the moment we're born we're
slowly cooking in that same way on the
inside we're slowly glycating we're
slowly Browning and then when we're
fully glycated when we're fully cooked
we die that's why when you look at the
cartilage of babies it's white and if
you look at the cartilage of somebody
who's 90 years old it's brown they've
cooked on the inside and every glucose
Spike increases you're looking at your
skin yeah from the outside we'd have to
like open you up and look at your
cartilage color got about 10 minutes
left and every glucose Spike increases
his process of glycation so much so that
glucose and glycation they kind of sound
like a similar word glucose glyc a it's
because it's glucose doing the glycating
so every glucose Spike increases
glycation increases cooking accelerates
aging and this shows on your skin you
get wrinkles faster if you glycate more
and also on the inside your organs
slowly get damaged so glucose spikes
mitochondria get tired you age
faster in response to this your body
knows Stephen that a big glucose spike
is not good for you your body knows that
it has to do something to try to get
that glucose level down so what it does
it calls up your pancreas and it's like
yo pancreas we got a glucose bike going
on we need to get this glucose down in
response your pancreas sends a hormone
called insulin out in your body you've
heard of insulin before right and
insulin's job and we love her her job is
to grab all these excess glucose
molecules and to store them away so they
don't damage your body anymore and
Insulin stores glucose away into your
liver into your muscles and then when
those are full insulin stores glucose
away into your fat cells and that's one
of the ways that you gain fat on your
body it's in response to the spikes and
your body trying to protect you from the
spikes the problem is insulin itself has
consequences and is the driver of type
two diabetes and insulin resistance so
to answer your question yes when you see
a big spike on your glucose monitor
there's some of that going on and the
more spikes you have the harder it is
going to be for your body to manage your
spikes so it kind of becomes a vicious
cycle if you keep eating the same way
your spice will get bigger and bigger
and bigger and bigger over time with
more and more damage on that last point
about where insulin stores the excess
glucose does that mean that if I have
more muscle mass I'm better at eating
sugary products yep and that's why if
you really love cookies the best time to
eat them is right after you work out
right before you work out because your
muscles are really hungry for glucose
all the time and the bigger your muscles
are the more you use them the more
they're going to capture some of that
glucose for energy okay so me and my
partner we both go to the gym she is
significantly smaller than me in every
way she's she's short she's you know
she's lean um I'm bigger than her I have
I have more muscle mass that means that
if I have one cookie and she has the
exact same cookie then her glucose
response is going to be potentially
significantly different to mine
yes potentially so if you just look at
muscle mass since you have more muscle
mass you'll be able to handle that
cookie better but there's so many things
that influence glucose response for
example your level of hydration how
stressed you are your microbiome your
genetics what time of the month you're
in when you're female how well you've
slept last night I mean there's a few
factors so if you were just to compare
your Spike to hers you couldn't really
draw any conclusions because there's so
many confounding variables there's
confounding variables give me a window
into some of them and why they matter
and how they have an impact on my
glucose
response so I think muscles is a really
good example right if two people eat the
same exact cookie the person with more
muscle mass is going to potentially see
a smaller glucose Spike because their
muscles are going to absorb more of that
glucose and faster if you look at
genetics some people are better at
growing their fat cells and at growing
the number and the size of their fat
cells so they have a bigger Reservoir to
put glucose in people of South Asian
descent for example they tend to have a
harder time putting on fat cells and as
a result their glucose spikes tend to be
bigger because they don't have that
storage unit that they can access and
increase the size of does that make
sense yeah yeah yeah are there any foods
that you have been surprised at when
you've tested them because this is one
of the really shocking things that I
discovered when I wore a continuous
glucose monitor is I would eat some
things that I've been eating for a long
long time and they would cause a spike
and I like what I thought that was
healthy yeah um but what are those
things I guess for the suris the
surprising ones not just for you but for
people that message you and go oh my God
Jesse I've been lied to about my tomato
ketchup or okay I think the biggest ones
are honey and grapes okay so grapes
first you think it's a fruit it's
healthy it's natural it's good for me
right well actually all the fruit that
we find today in supermarkets is not
natural it is the product of human
breeding for thousands and thousands of
years to make them extra sweet extra
juicy in the same way that humans have
been breeding dogs from the time of the
gray wolves into Chihuahua and Golden
Retrievers these are not natural types
of dogs we've bred wolves into these
dogs fruit is the same thing we've bred
pces of fruit to make these beautiful
grapes without any seeds and just this
little pocket of sugar and so a grape
when you look at it actually it's just a
big dose of sugar it's in the fruit
format so people think it's good for
them but actually when it comes to your
glucose levels it's just big glucose
Spike so those are really surprising all
fruits it varies right so for example
berries are lower in Sugar so create a
smaller Spike but any tropical fruit
like bananas mangoes papayas and then
grapes also those are really high in
sugar yeah but the thing is you know
piece of whole fruit is okay because it
has fiber in it the real problem comes
when you denature that piece of fruit
and you turn it into a juice for example
cuz then you're removing that protective
fiber just extracting the water and the
sugar yeah I've not drank a glass of
juice since starting this podcast
because so many people have spoken to
have told me that it's just like
drinking sugar water yeah it's just like
drinking a can of Coke but people think
well it comes from a piece of fruit so
it's natural orange juice comes from
oranges therefore it's good for you
because it's natural what they don't
realize is that the sugar in a can of
soda is also natural it comes from sugar
beets or canes so if you're you're
really looking at the source of the
sugar you realize it doesn't matter at
all they all come from plants what
matters is the concentration and the
medium that the sugar is in I understand
grapes causing a glucose Spike because
when I taste it it tastes sweet but
there's some things that I eat that
don't taste sweet that cause a glucose
Spike and those are the things that I
think lie to me like bread like bread
like rice yeah well the thing is glucose
is actually not sweet what you're
tasting in fruit is fructose so let me
explain so starches like bread pasta
rice potatoes
oats those are starches those are
literally millions of glucose molecules
just attached hand to hand like this
that's a starch it's just a long chain
of glucose when you eat the starch poof
it turns into individual glucose
molecules raises your blood sugar even
though it doesn't taste sweet in a piece
of fruit or in Sugar you're not eating
starch what you're eating is sucrose
different kind of molecule which which
is half glucose half
fructose yeah so when it breaks down it
gives you glucose and a spike but also
fructose that tastes really sweet but
doesn't raise your blood sugar levels
that much so again on the other side of
the queen then are there foods that
taste sweet but don't have an impact on
my glucose yes
sweeteners Stevia aspartame things like
that so you saying that I should put
sweeters in my food as opposed to Sugar
well I think people need to realize that
even though sweeteners are not super
good for us right of course it's better
to drink water than a diet soda the diet
soda is better for you than the regular
can of soda with the 30 grams of real
sugar in there I personally would never
have a can of real soda I would always
have the diet soda always always always
because those sweeteners don't raise
your blood sugar levels okay they don't
create that big spike and that big
insulin Spike and then the drop is there
such a good thing as good sugar m
is there any such thing as good
sugar
no people often believe that if the
sugar is coming from a fruit and is is
for example in a fruit smoothie that
they might have in the morning that's
good sugar but that Sugar that's in a
cake is bad sugar so people tend to
compare these two and say oh well I'm
having a fruit smoothie that's good for
me but oh that chocolate cake would be
bad for me that's a total lie it's all
the same molecules the molecules in that
fruit smoothie and the molecules in that
chocolate cake are the same it's sucrose
it's the same stuff and your body
doesn't differentiate whether the sugar
is in a fruit smoothie or the sugar is
in a chocolate cake so all sugar is the
same even you know honey Agave maple
syrup all these things that have these
Health Halos because of marketing it's
all the same molecules so I recommend
that people just have the sugar that
they like best don't think that one is
going to be better for you than the
other and have all sugar as dessert so
that fruit smoothie that's also dessert
dessert it's not super healthy because
it comes from fruits it's just like the
chocolate cake and are there is there
such a thing as good sweetness and bad
sweetness yeah so there's a few
categories so the ones that seem to be
really fine for us are Stevia monk fruit
and allulose the ones that have been
linked to quite a few health issues are
aspartame ml sucralose so for example a
Spartan you usually find it in soda
whereas Stevia you might buy a little
packet at home and put it in your tea
that being said the spart tame is still
better for you than the real can of coke
with a 30 grams of real sugar so Stevia
is something that I shouldn't be no
Stevia is good yeah you shouldn't be too
concern do you use Stevia I didn't put
any Sweetness in anything I didn't put
sugar in anything either so I'm trying
to stay away have coffee it's just black
coffee you don't even eat chocolate of
course I chocolate maybe not so much
maybe that's not my thing but what's
your sweet thing carrot cake what's your
sweet thing oh chocolate I love
chocolate like my favorite is is like
chocolate ice cream with a chocolate
brownie and chocolate sauce and
chocolate sprinkles anything chocolate
that's not very glucose godess well
here's where you're wrong Stephen I'm
actually not anti- sugar what are you
talking about no I love sugar I eat
sugar I eat carbs all the time but I
want people to know what I know which is
how and when to eat those things that's
the end of the podcast thank you so much
really great to see you
again seriously we need to learn how to
eat these things cuz they're so
delicious in a way that's less bad for
our health it's not about cutting them
out that would be a diet I don't I'm not
I'm not pro diets I'm Pro knowledge and
I want to make sure people are not
having sugar and dessert for breakfast
you know sweet cereal in the morning and
orange juice that's dessert anyway I'm
all about just trying to empower people
with the information so they don't get
trapped by these marketing lies are we
meant to be eating the amounts of sugar
that we eat though like are we meant to
be eating any sugar is what does our
sort of evolutionary history tell us
about our relationship with glucose I
think fruit is something we're meant to
be eating but the fruit that used to
exist was less sweet and harder to
digest and more fibrous and then in
terms of starches starches are totally
fine to eat the problem is today most of
us just eat sugar and starches we've
completely lost touch with the nice
proteins and the organ meats and the
fiber and the healthy fats we're in a
situation where the food landscape is so
toxic and it's so just starches and
sugars that people are getting sicker
and sicker and sicker and it's addictive
and it's cheap so we're in a very
difficult situation and that's the
situation that you know the gp1s are
trying to solve we're in a pickle we are
in a pickle are you optimistic about the
pickle we're in as it relates to sugar
and
Creos I have to say yes because the
amount of Transformations I see in my
readers is really encouraging you know
people are reclaiming their health
getting power over it understanding food
again but we've got a lot of work to do
and I can do my work educating people
from the ground up on these hacks but we
also need like systemic change we need
policy we need governments to get
involved and we need to find ways to
make healthier food because we're just
killing the population right now it's
really terrible so talking about some of
the consequences of a high glucose diet
one of them you mentioned earlier when
we were talking about glycation is
aging has anyone ever done any research
to prove that a high glucose diet is
associated with correlated with
increased or accelerated aging I mean
yes because we see that the people who
eat the most sugar get the most diseases
right so we see correlations but they're
not they're not like a clinical trial
you can't take two populations and say
okay everybody's 30 years old we're
going to give this half a healthy no
glucose Spike diet and this half glucose
spikes every single day and then we'll
see when they're 80 you know which group
has aged faster we can't do that that's
unethical so we have to look at
correlations and we see things like if
you have really high glucose levels High
insulin levels you're more likely to get
heart disease dementia depression etc
etc we have correlative studies and we
understand the mechanism of the
glycation what about the superficial
signs of aging wrinkles like the
wrinkles a lot of skincare products
actually Target glycation from the
outside in so they'll put like
antioxidants on your skin to reduce
glycation if you're in the skincare
World you'll see glycation mentioned
everywhere what they don't do is they
don't look at at how to reduce glycation
from the inside out which is what I
think is more interesting and it's
through food by reducing your glucose
levels you reduce glycation it's just
like a A to B it's very simple so if I
want to Stave off wrinkles then I should
keep my glucose levels down yes and you
should also avoid smoking you know wear
sunscreen Etc but in terms of your diet
what you want to focus on is focus on
reducing glucose spikes yeah absolutely
what about things like acne and skin
conditions so those are more
inflammatory based diseases so eczema
psoriasis acne rosacea those are
expressions of inflammation going on
within your body and I like to think of
the skin as a mirror to what's going on
within and so inflamation can happen to
loads of different factors but one of
the factors is glucose spikes so glucose
spikes hurt our mitochondria that
creates inflammation then glucose spikes
lead to glycation which also leads to
inflammation and Insulin release and a
lot of insulin also increases
inflammation so with every glucose Spike
you're increasing inflammation within
your body and if you're susceptible to
any of these skin conditions you can
have fups or increase their intensity
very simply and does it also have an
impact on my hormonal balance I am a lot
of my friends I'm in that age range now
where a lot of my friends are trying to
have children yeah and there's so much
talk around things like polycystic ovary
syndrome and fertility and you know
infertility in men with their sperm and
all these kinds of things is there a
link between glucose and hormones and
fertility yes so we have studies that
show that the more insulin resistant you
are so insulin resistance is a
consequence of just a lot of insulin in
the body the more likely you are to be
infertile and then we also know that
PCOS so polycystic ovarian syndrome
which is one of the leading causes of
infertility in women we know that 60% of
PCOS cases also are people who have
insulin resistance there's a link there
insulin resistance you're more likely to
have PCOS and we also know that when
there's a lot of insulin in a female
body it tells your ovaries to produce
more testosterone testosterone is the
male sex hormone and if you have too
much male sex hormone in the body that
causes issues it can cause acne it can
cause balding or hair growth on the face
and it can stop your period now often
when somebody has PCOS they're given the
birth control pill
which kind of makes sense on the surface
but really doesn't solve anything what
happens when you take the birth control
pill is that you're just ingesting
female hormones that's what the pill is
it's female hormones so if you have high
testosterone all of a sudden you're
ingesting female hormones so the balance
kind of comes back to an okay situation
your symptoms of excess testosterone go
away but as soon as you stop the pill
the high testosterone is still there so
a lot of people stop the pill trying to
have a baby and they're like oh
I don't have my period I have PCOS what
do I do so one recommendation I have is
if you have PCOS look at your glucose
bikes first it's not the only reason
this can happen but very often when you
fix your glucose and insulin levels the
symptoms of PCOS go away I was saw
something on Twitter a couple of weeks
ago that was trying to make the case
that glucose and Insulin responses are
the reason for PCOS yeah some people
believe that totally you know it's a
very politically charged topic some
people believe you have PCOS it's
genetic you can't do anything about it
other people believe no no it's a
metabolic disease it's a cluster of
symptoms that come from high insulin I'm
in that camp but you know there are some
cases where somebody has PCOS and
doesn't have high insulin levels so what
category do they go into the thing with
PCOS Stephen is that it's not a real
Condition it's like a cluster of
symptoms so some people could have PCOS
and have cystic ovaries and balding
somebody else could have PCOS and have
you know missed periods and hair growth
on their chin so it can take different
forms so I think we're starting to
understand there there variations of
PCOS and some are in the insulin
resistant category have you seen a woman
res reverse have PCOS symptoms tons in
my second book I ran a study three
females who were in the program doing my
hacks for just a month got their period
back and were able to get pregnant in
that month just with my hacks I see PCOS
reversal all the
time so these hacks that you you say
those three women use to help reverse
their their PCOS
symptoms what are the hacks oh the hacks
what are the ones that they did so the
ones they did were Savory
breakfast vinegar once a day veggie
starters and moving after eating and
these are four hacks that are the four
most important ones of my 10 hacks that
I've put together in the four-week
method that second
book and if you do these hacks you don't
actually have to change anything else
that you're eating you don't have to cut
out anything you just add these in I
like to see them like um little fairy
godmothers that you have in your pocket
and you just put throughout your day
like this and you're able to reduce your
glucose spikes while still eating what
you love in a very low efforts kind of
way and I believe these hacks should be
seen like you would
see brush your teeth wear sunscreen
drink enough water have a Savory
breakfast move after eating have a
Savory breakfast so are you saying
people shouldn't be eating sugar for
breakfast correct so the concept of a
savory breakfast comes from the simple
realization that if you have a breakfast
that creates a big glucose Spike you're
affecting your body in many bad ways
first of all you're leading to your
brain not functioning too well during
that day it's leading to brain fog it
can make you a bit confused second it
makes you tired it increases Cravings
throughout the day and it also
deregulates your glucose levels for the
rest of the day your breakfast is very
powerful if you have a glucose bike at
breakfast your whole day is a glucose
roller coaster so what you want to do
Stephen is always have a Savory
breakfast that keeps your glucose level
steady a Savory breakfast is what it's
based around
protein eggs uh fish meat tofu nuts
Dairy protein powder dinner leftovers
okay protein it's really important to
have protein in the morning then you add
some healthy fats olive oil butter
avocado and then if you want for taste
you can add a bit of starch like a piece
of bread for example or some potatoes
importantly a Savory breakfast contains
nothing sweet no cereal no muffins no
orange juice no granola no fruit puree
none of that it's really key sugar in my
coffee no no no no if you want sugar
have it as dessert after a meal after
lunch or after after dinner because
after your lunch and after your dinner
you have lots of food already in the
digestive system so any sugar you put in
afterwards is going to impact your
glucose levels less you said that if I
have something sweet for my breakfast
I'm then going to be on a glucose roller
coaster yeah why because glucose Spike
then insulin comes out and your glucose
drop then your glucose are low here you
get really hungry you have a lot of
cravings when our glucose levels are
dropping scientists have shown it
increases the activity of the craving
Center in our brain so it goes like
Stephen eat some sugar and you can't
control that so what you do you reach
for more sugar bam another glucose Spike
and then you just continue your whole
day like that so you sort of put
yourself into a corner if you start your
day with a spike and it's really
difficult to get off that roller coaster
does that roller coaster last across
days good question generally during the
night is sort of resets and my glucose
test I saw that when I go to sleep it
kind of flattens out kind of goes quite
low at night time
however I've got this unscientific
observation where if I start if I had a
carrot cake now um there's a high
probability that I'd probably want to
have a carrot cake by dinner time
tonight as well and then when I wake up
the next day I probably I'm going to be
more likely to go for the carrot cake
again and I if I if I zoomed out on my
life say the whole 12 months of a year
there will be maybe like this little
week or two in clusters where maybe
there's a couple of months in between
and then there's this two we [__]
Splurge again where I find it really
hard not to reach for something across
multiple days now I'm not sure if this
is in my head I think there's a few
things going on one The Taste is really
addictive so you get addicted to getting
that taste and getting the dopamine
don't forget there's the dopamine rush
in your brain second with every glucose
Spike you're actually deregulating your
hunger hormones so you get you have more
Cravings you're hungrier and yes this
can totally last for a few days and I
think thirdly if you have the carrot
cake at home for a few days maybe you're
just more likely to reach for it because
it's there you know but I feel I feel
similarly to you I have these phases
especially if I'm really busy and I
can't do all the hacks all the time
where I'm eating a bunch of sugar and
then it lasts until I say okay stop back
on the hacks and I do the hacks for two
days and then I'm good again that's the
same with me but also I find that if I
do a really big workout yeah for me it
helps to break that cycle so if I this
weekend I did a re I was I think I was
in that cycle of like I wasn't reaching
for sugar as in like something sweet I
was reaching for like I was having a lot
of like toast with my breakfast or I was
having like carbs and then I did a
really big workout and the last thing I
wanted was anything with carbs in or
glucose I think it's also in the brain
you know cuz you're rebalancing those
hormones that dopamine you're getting
endorphins from the workout so you're
not seeking all that pleasure from just
sugar okay I think if you're in a cycle
where all you're just getting dopamine
from sugar it just becomes addictive and
you have to do stuff in your life that
allows you to feel good in your brain
without having that sugar so maybe I got
the dopamine from the workout instead
totally and so I kind of shifted yeah
the source of dopamine so that was the
first hack which is Theory breakfast
Super Key by the way if you just do one
hack do this one it is a complete
GameChanger and a Savory breakfast
should keep you satiated for 4 hours
which is a long time most people get
hungry again 2 hours after they have
breakfast so make sure you're having
enough protein in your breakfast to stay
full for four hours
okay on that what if I fast totally fine
make sure the first meal of your day is
also Savory so it can be at 8 a.m. it
can be at 4 P.M I do not care as long as
the first thing that you eat is
something Savory because when you're
fasted your digestive system is super
empty and sensitive so whatever you give
it whether it's in the morning after
just sleeping or whether it's after a
two week fast is going to go really
quickly into your bloodstream so you
have to be cautious and make sure you're
not giving your body glucose otherwise
big [__] do you think fasting is good
for you inent
fasting I think it's nuanced I think
what I've seen is that in men it just
works way better in females it can kind
of mess up your hormones you have to be
a bit um judicious about when you fast
and we also have to remember guys
fasting is a stressor on the body it is
a good stressor but it is a stressor so
if you have an intense job kids to take
care of you drink coffee you have you
know three times a week you do hit
cardio then you do a sauna then you do a
cul lunch then you fast your body is
going to freak the [__] out you have to
like dose these stressors in a way that
is going to be manageable for your body
I see lots of women who do all those
things I just mentioned and then they're
like and I don't have my perod and I
don't understand I don't feel good I'm
like your body is freaking out like
relax you can't be putting all these
stressors on yourself all the time so I
fast when I'm on vacation and what kind
of fasting do you do I like we'll skip a
meal we'll skip dinner we'll skip
breakfast and it just helps your body
clean up its dead cells and it's really
helpful but we have to remember that
fasting is a stressor it has great
benefits but you don't have to fast in
order to be healthy it's very important
to also look at what you're eating
because if you're fasting 16 hours a day
and then you're just eating junk food
it's not going to be helpful to your
body we have to do both in combination
do you fast naturally yeah so I haven't
eaten today what time are we we 1:00 um
and I won't eat until you've had a
coffee I've had a coffee this morning
yeah but I won't eat until what 400 p.m.
5:00 p.m. which will be probably you
know after I get back to the office and
stuff like that you feel good I feel
fine so that's the thing right my
recommendation is if you feel great Fab
if you feel stressed out if you feel
light-headed if it feels hard yeah then
don't do it your body can't handle it
just doesn't cross my mind to eat I
don't know how people eat it's amazing
yeah then go for it live your life Man
live your life Stephen what about
calorie restriction do you think much
about that I mean it works right if you
if few calories you're going to lose
weight but this is one of my favorite
stories do you know how calories were
invented maybe okay they like put it in
a box and burnt it they put yes I I told
you that yes so back in the day to
measure calories what do you want to
measure the calorie of tell me something
some my food car cake
okay okay so if we were back in the day
like 100 years ago and we wanted to
measure the calories in your carrot cake
here's what we would do we would take
the carrot cake put it in a box then put
this box in an aquarium filled with
water so you have the aquarium and then
inside you have the box with the carrot
cake then we would light the carrot cake
on fire inside the small box and measure
by how many degrees the water in the
aquarium increased in temperature so
we're just measuring the heat that is
created when we burn the carrot cake
that is how we measure calories by how
much heat is generated when you burn a
food so if you were to put in that same
box I don't know three avocados and you
burnt them you might get the same
temperature increase in the water so you
might say oh this carrot cake and these
three avocados have the same number of
calories but the thing is with the
calorie thing it's not actually telling
you what's in the food it's just
measuring energy that dissipated when
you burnt it it's not telling you the
carrot cake is going to lead to a big
glucose Spike going to make you inflamed
age faster release insulin whereas the
three avocados will keep you steady and
feeling better so two people can be
eating 2,000 calories diets one person
can be eating in a way that keeps their
glucose nice and steady they feel good
good energy F Cravings clear brain not
super hungry all the time the other
person can be eating just glucose
spiking food and they're having a
terrible time they're hungry constantly
they have cravings brain fog insulin
release so calories are interesting but
they're not not everything we need to
teach people about the molecules in
their food I find that to be a much
easier way to try to eat a bit less if
you're trying to lose some fat is to
just focus on your glucose levels
because naturally your hunger hormones
will rebalance you'll have few cravings
and it's much easier to eat less is
there a story that you've been sent or a
case study from someone that's followed
your work that's stuck with you someone
that's understood their glucose and had
a big shift in their life I imagine
there's thousands but yeah there's many
many I think for there's two things for
me there's the the pregnancy stories
because I think that's so touching
because I've had many friends go through
difficult fertility Journeys and to hear
people who were about to embark on
really intense fertility treatments and
just tried this and then got pregnant I
think that's really cool and then second
I think it's the people
whom there was this one guy he's had
diabetes his whole life he's like in his
50s um on lots of medication and just
thought he would lose a leg and lose his
vision that's what happens when you have
type two for a very long time
and the thing is his doctors had never
explained to him why he had diabetes
they had just told him you know take
this pill and I take this insulin and he
read my book and he understood why he
got diabetes in the first place and he
did the hacks he was able to reverse his
type two diabetes in one year all his
doctors were like how did you do it you
know doctors don't often have this kind
of information and then he sent me a
long message saying now I'll be able to
see my grandkid wedding and I really
thank you for that it's so cute you know
we're all we're all stuck in this
vicious cycle of having this toxic food
around us that's making us sick but not
understanding how to get out of it and
everybody wants to be healthy that man
he was eating stuff that he thought
would be good for him he was eating like
the low calorie rice cakes and the fruit
smoothies and the lowfat yogurts and all
these things trying to be healthier but
if you don't have the right information
you can't actually make a change what
would you say to parents it's it's
really interesting cuz I I've had the
experience of watching a lot of early
parents over the last couple of months
and um they care so much about their
kids just eating it something that often
they'll give them something that is high
in glucose does it matter you know
because sometimes people look at kids
and go well they're a kid they they'll
kind of it won't have an impact on them
they'll kind of grow out of it yeah well
we'll make sure that they eat healthy
later we just need to make sure they eat
something now listen we used to think
type two diabetes was a disease is
reserved for adults and now 5-year-olds
get it it's very important to help your
kids eat well so that they set up their
body in a healthy way one thing that I
hear is yeah Jesse I know I should be
giving my kids eggs in the morning but
they just keep begging for the cereal
and I just I can't say no you know they
they won't they won't let go I have to
give it to them and I say what if they
were begging you for
cigarettes would you give them the
cigarettes like you don't actually have
to give your kids this food it's hard
for for sure but if it's a priority for
you you can totally do it absolutely and
I think it's important to set an example
actually because if you're having cereal
and orange juice it's going to be really
hard for your kids to take you seriously
like come on dad like you know shut up
what you think of giving kids orange
juice oh my God it's terrible it's the
worst it's it's it's just terrible it's
big rush of sugar can affect it can
affect Behavior you know tantrums and
the sugar cravings and the sugar lows I
mean no it's terrible it breaks my heart
I'm like wow those little bodies are not
happy right now you know there's so many
parents that are listening right now
like you don't [__] get it you too
childless better totally and that's why
Stephen you know when I have kids I
totally want to write a book about that
because I think there's lots of stuff we
can teach a parents about how to feed
their kids it's too easy for me to say
this stuff I don't have kids I don't
know how it is but I can tell you one
thing there will be no orange juice in
my house no orange juice like my mom my
mom was addicted to diet coke when she
was younger so we never had soda in our
house never and I hate I hate soda now I
would never be able to drink any of that
stuff because it was never I never
learned to like it so don't be scared
that your kid is going to binge if you
restrict all the sugary stuff I think
it's the opposite I think if you don't
give them the Habit they just won't have
the habit I do agree we we um we didn't
have many sweet things or fizzy drinks
or anything in in the house and I think
as a kid I was resentful because you
you'd go to school and you'd see those
things you you'd lean towards them and
you'd love them at school but frankly as
I've grown older I'm completely cool
with just drinking water all the time
that's part partly because that's what
we had in the house so my relationship
with water is pretty strong I feel you
but you know one thing that parents do
tell me is that when they do their
glucose hacks and they manage their
glucose levels they're able to be more
Zen around their kids and sort of you
know stay a bit more um centered when
their kids are freaking out or asking
about something a lot their their mood
is steadier so they can actually make
better choices for the whole family and
they have a bit more stamina and uh then
their kids do the hacks and their kids
get calmer and then the family is just
having a better time generally but it
can really
impact even a marriage this a great
study I have to tell you about that was
looking at married couples so they
recruited 300 married couples and bless
these scientists they're just insane so
they recruited 300 married couples they
gave each person in the marriage a
voodoo doll representing their spouse so
if you're in a marriage you have a
voodoo doll representing your husband or
your wife scientists then asked the
people to put a pin in the voodo doll
representing their spouse every time
their spouse annoyed them for six weeks
at the end of the study they took all
the voodoo dolls counted the pins they
also measured the participants glucose
levels what they found Stephen is that
those who had more variable glucose
levels specifically those who had more
low glucose level events which happens
after spikes had put more pins in the
voodoo doll representing their spouse so
their glucose levels seem to be linked
to how irritated they were with their
partner and then the scientists
speculated that this had to do with a
neurotransmitter called tyrosine and the
more glucose roller coaster you have
going on the lower your tyrosine levels
and tyrosine balances our mood so the
food you eat can impact your marriage
can impact how you show up
with others can impact how you feel
about other people's behavior it goes
really deep it's not just about diabetes
it it impacts who you are as a person
your personality so if I stop eating
sugar it will save my marriage I mean
you said
it it's not it's really interesting I
was thinking as you were talking as well
about how glucose is linked to our sort
of discipline more broadly you know you
were talking earlier about parents and
them being able to be more sort of
disciplined and strict with and calm
when they themselves get their glucose
under control but you think about all of
our lives our lives are shaped by the
habits that we perform consistently and
for us to have good um habits that are
prod conducive with our health our
happiness our success then we need to be
focused and disciplined and be able to
reach for the right things um whether
it's a dumbbell or whether it's our
laptop yeah so like do do you ever think
much about the role that glucose plays
with our sort of discipline to be who we
want to be to sh up how we want to sh up
completely because so many people are
stuck in a cycle of being a victim to
their Cravings being a victim to their
fatigue and they can't show up as the
person they want to be and if you switch
your diet and use these hacks you can
actually be more connected to the
version of yourself that you want to be
and even just a simple thing like a
Savory breakfast it can deeply change
how you show up throughout your day
instead of being exhausted at 11:00 a.m.
needing four coffees feeling this
lethargic in your work meeting then at 3
p.m. thinking oh I really want to have a
nap I would have a nap on the floor
right here if I could looking for sugar
all the time you actually have a clearer
brain like we know glucose spikes are
linked to even just brain fog and brain
fog is a debilitating symptom to have
you can't show up as the person you want
to be I would never be able to do the
work that I do if I didn't have my
glucose under control and I learned that
from the very beginning that's why I got
into this work in the first place but
100% agree with you yeah so the first
hack we talked about was the Savory
breakfast there was the second one you
talked about vinegar which we talked
about last time which I remember I was
really repulsed by but you count this as
one of your most important hacks is to
eat vinegar every day it's drink one
tablespoon of vinegar in a big glass of
water before your biggest meal of the
day and the reason it's important
Stephen is because it's easy and I'm all
about easy hacks big bang for your bck
so vinegar contains acetic acid which
interacts with your digestive enzymes
and cuts the glucose Spike of your meal
by up to 30% with no effort so if you
want a super low effort albeit not very
delicious super low effort hack to try
do that and see how you feel with a
smaller Spike and a smaller crash few
Cravings less fatigue what kind of
vinegar any kind of vinegar it can be
the vinegar you have at home literally
tonight just grab the white vinegar in
your kitchen and not the cleaning
vinegar if it's next to the toilet paper
it's not the right vinegar you want the
kitchen vinegar one tablespoon in a big
glass of water dilute it drink it 10
minutes before having your dinner see
how you feel what's what role is the
water playing in this just dilution so
that it doesn't hurt your teeth because
your dentist won't be very happy if you
take a shot of vinegar because it can
hurt your teeth's enamel okay so that's
hack number two and that's really to
sort of line my stomach to so no that's
to interact with your digestive enzymes
the line stomach is the third hack which
is Veggie starters so all around the
world if you look at different cultures
you see this habit this tradition of
starting your meal with veggies in Italy
aunti
in France crud raw vegetables at the end
of your at the beginning of your meal in
the Middle East you start your meals
with herbs by the bunch right why are we
doing this veggies first thing well
recently scientists have discovered why
it's so powerful it's because veggies
contain fiber we love fiber she's the
best when you have fiber at the
beginning of a meal what it does is that
it coats your intestine it makes this
sort of protective barrier this
protective mesh kind of goo fibrous mesh
and so any glucose you eat afterwards
will not be able to go through your
intestine into your bloodstream so
quickly so it slows down the arrival of
glucose into your blood and it slows
down that Spike you can make the
experiment if you're wearing a monitor
just have a a small plate of you know
carrots or spinach or broccoli or cherry
tomatoes or whatever veggie you like
before a meal and see how much smaller
your glucose spike is you stay Fuller
for longer have few crat and you're
helping your body from within too and
the fourth one you mentioned was moving
after after eating yeah so after eating
use your body and your muscles for 10
minutes you can clean your apartment go
for a walk with your dog dance to a few
songs if you're at the office you can do
calf raises under your desk like this so
you just sort of push up onto the balls
of your feet up and down for 10 minutes
nobody will see and your calves contain
a muscle called the Solus muscle which
is really good at soaking up glucose but
it's what we were talking about earlier
Stephen your muscles are really
effective glucose dumps and the more you
use them to contract the more they're
going to soak up glucose from your
bloodstream to use for energy so that's
the four hacks Savory breakfast vinegar
once a day veggie starter once a day you
can also combine those two and do like a
vinegar dressing on a veggie starter and
then moving after eating and then when
you want to get Pro you go to all my
other hacks people talk about being in a
food comr after they've eaten yeah which
which is I mean the antithesis of what
you're you're saying absolutely food
coma is like a combination of brain fog
and fatigue right and what's going on
there well I think there's a lot of
things going on but one study that's
really interesting shows us that in rats
when you create lots of big glucose
spikes and when you monitor the activity
of their neurons in the rats scientists
noticed that the more glucose spikes
they had the slower the speed of the
signal between their neurons so their
brain was literally slowing down the
information was going more slowly
throughout the brain and they're the
they theorized that in humans this could
lead to brain fog so you have glucose
spikes linked to brain fog and your
mitochondria becoming exhausted from Big
glucose spikes potentially making you
really tired you know 90 minutes after
eating with the hack food coma reduced
significantly so you can actually do
stuff after eating instead of just being
lying down and not being able to get up
and you took these hacks and you did an
experiment right on page seven of your
book the glucose goddess
method you talk about this 2,700 person
pilot experiment that you did in 2019
yeah which of the hacks did you use for
this experiment and what did you find so
it was these four hacks so it was a
four-week experiment week one you start
your Savory breakfast every day you do
that for the four weeks week two you add
in vinegar once a day you continue for
for the rest of the three weeks week
three you add veggie starters and week
four you add moving after eating you
don't have to change anything else about
what you're eating I'm not cutting out
sugar I'm not telling you to not drink
alcohol I'm not telling you to not drink
pasta I'm just asking you to add these
for hacks in and see what happens and
these people were from 110 countries
yeah I recruited I recruited them online
on through Instagram between the ages of
20 and 70 years old mhm and what
happened listen the results were really
stunning so 90% of people reduced their
Cravings 90% of people had more energy
you had really significant impacts on
sleep on hormones on skin on mood on
Diabetes I mean of course this is not a
you know Placebo controlled randomized
trial it's just an experiment I didn't
have a control group but these numbers
are pretty remarkable and that's what I
see when I meet people when I see the
testimonials from my readers so just
very quick impact because glucose spikes
imp act all parts of our system physical
and mental and when you balance them
Stephen you're creating a much better
foundation for your body and your mind
to be healthy and these are
self-reported symptoms right totally
yeah so we did a survey at the end of
every of the four weeks and uh just
measured the results and when you say
there's no control group that means that
there wasn't another group who weren't
who were doing like a different kind of
intervention or Placebo no okay so it
was just 3,000 people doing the hacks
and I was just asking them questions uh
at the end and it says here 40% roughly
40% of people who wanted to lose weight
did in fact lose weight in those four
weeks yeah with no calorie restriction
no request to eat less and the reason
this is interesting is that even though
weight loss is not the primary objective
of balancing your glucose levels what
happens when you reduce your spikes is
that you reduce Cravings because you're
not activating that craving Center
anymore you reduce hunger you have more
energy to potentially move more and you
lower your insulin levels now this is
very important because when there's
insulin present in your body you cannot
burn fat insulin is storing fat and
making more fat and when you lower
insulin you can actually burn some of
the fat that you stored and there's
going to be people screaming because
they want to know the other sort of six
this 10 right yeah I can go through all
of them if you want sit the other six AR
of course of course of course so another
hack is eating your food in the right
now this is kind of similar to the
veggie starter it's just a bit more
complicated and it's really where the
science it's really what the science
shows us the science shows us that if
you eat a meal in the right order
meaning veggies first then proteins and
fats then starches and sugars instead of
the opposite you reduce the glucose
Spike of the meal by up to
75% you're eating the same meal the same
quantity the same food just the order
and using that fiber first mentality
is going to reduce your Spike
significantly just to be clear this
doesn't mean that I'm going to gain less
weight from that
meal well no because it doesn't H you
know weight loss doesn't happen within
one specific meal but it does mean
you'll have fewer Cravings a couple
hours after that meal so maybe you won't
reach for the donut okay that's how it
would work so indirectly I might not
game more away exactly exactly so eating
your food in the right order okay having
a Savory breakfast we talked about it
veggies first we talked about it vinegar
we talked about it moving after eating
we talked about it and then there's
clothes on
carbs so that means anytime you eat
starches or sugars which are the big
category of carbs make sure you're never
eating them naked or on their own
because if you eat them on their own
plof they just turn into glucose really
really quickly so instead of having a
slice of bread on its own have bread and
some avocado add some fat to that that's
a good clothing to add or add some
protein or add some Fiber if you're
having a carrot cake don't have it on
its own have it with a Greek yogurt for
example so that's clothes on carbs it's
really easy to remember especially if
you're going throughout your day and you
can't really pick what you're eating
because you don't have many options just
think clothes on carbs then we have
Savory
snacks so during a day if you want to
have a snack between meals when your
stomach is empty try to have something
Savory that won't increase your glucose
spikes instead of having something sweet
then another hack that we kind of
touched on is if you want to eat
something sweet have it as dessert
instead of on an empty stomach so if I
want a cookie or a carrot cake I will
make sure to buy it in the morning if I
know where I want to get it from and
then have it as dessert after my lunch
or after my dinner so I'm not removing
any of the sugar from your life I'm just
showing you how and when to eat it so it
will reduce the glucose Spike and then
we have always eat your fruit whole
never Juiced never dried never smoothed
only whole to have that protective fiber
in there thinking about your Instagram
you post these photos of glucose spikes
with um in response to different foods
how do you trial that is that oh great
question are those your spikes yeah
those are my spikes or the spikes from
somebody on my team but it's really
important to note that these spikes are
just
illustrating studies trials that have
been done by scientists around the world
so for example I'll find a clinical
trial showing that vinegar before a meal
reduces a glucose Spike it's been shown
at scale with a placebo you know proper
clinical study and I'll just make an
example with my own data to illustrate
that scientific study and that's why if
you swipe on my post you'll see my graph
and then the study that I mentioned or
in the description of the post I don't
draw any conclusions from my own glucose
data I'm not like oh look today I had a
green tea and that didn't cause a spike
and yesterday I had a green tea and I
also had a piece of I don't know
whatever an almond and that caused a
biggest [__] so I should be telling
everybody to not have elments like
that's not how it works at all it's just
an illustration of existing studies
that's my role that's my job that's what
I love to do to translate studies that
are existing in a way that makes it
easier for people to understand because
you can't just give somebody a
scientific paper you have to explain it
in a visual way that they can
immediately get it so of those visuals
that you've made is there some in
particular that were most surprising to
you or most shocking to you because I'm
going to put some of them on the screen
so some of them that come to mind that
would maybe had the biggest response
from your audience for example yeah I
think some of the ones that show
traditional food combinations and how
they're actually good for our glucose
levels are fascinating for example
grapes and cheese so I'm French and
often when you eat like a big uh plateau
of cheese you'll have some grapes there
to have with and it you know the glucose
response shows us that if we had the
grape on its own it would be a bigger
Spike than the grape with the cheese not
only is it really delicious it's Al
better for your glucose levels because
you're putting clothing on that sugary
carb that is the piece of fruit or ham
and melon or rice and beans all these
traditional combinations cause smaller
spikes than you would expect from the
individual ingredients that's really
quite fascinating in terms of the most
um shocking ones I think
any glucose graph showing food order is
really interesting so for example if you
have salad and then then pasta which is
much better for your glucose levels than
having pasta and then the salad
interesting yeah and that's the food
order hack going on do you know off the
top of your head what your most engaged
post has been of all time the one that's
been shared the most or commented on the
most um actually it's one currently at
least on YouTube it's one where I
explain where I show an image of an
ancestral banana what bananas used to
actually look like in nature and what
bananas look like today to illustrate
that the fruit that you find today in
the supermarket is not natural so that's
a very very popular one and then I think
it's the hacks um it's the glucose
graphs and the videos where I explain
food order people really love that it's
so interesting to see that if you have
your veggies at the beginning of a meal
you have such a big impact on your
glucose levels whereas we've all been
taught that all your food mixes in your
stomach and mixes like big smoothie and
it doesn't matter well it does
actually yeah that because that's really
easy to change as well totally you don't
have to change what you're eating how
much you're eating just next time you're
sat at a meal think oh I'm going to have
the veggies on my plate first that's it
so powerful these hacks are so easy
Stephen I really want everybody to know
them I want to become irrelevant I don't
want to have any more work because
everybody knows these hacks it's so
important for our Public Health I think
some uh vinegar has arrived for you to
shot yeah no we can't shot it Stephen we
have to dilute it I'm I'll dilute it as
well let
for yes so this is side of vinegar but
any vinegar works you don't have to buy
expensive vinegar it doesn't have to be
organic unfiltered whatever just kitchen
vinegar works no I try it straight I've
actually never really drink okay but if
you're dentist is upset it's not my
fault okay
well so Jesse told me to drink this
straight no she's an expert she said
she's a scientist
oh
gosh yeah you're not supposed to do that
Stephen no I'm
sorry no it's been really lovely getting
to imagine if but it's not that bad but
it's not something that I would do for
fun yeah but also if you want to have
vinegar straight you need to get higher
quality vinegar there's some vinegars
that taste really really good but in our
case we're just trying to get the acetic
acid and we don't need high quality
expensive vinegar we can just do like
really cheap
vinegar and this is a we just put one
tbspoon this is a good hack if you have
a parent that has diabetes and they
don't want to change anything about
their lifestyle just get them to add
this before their meals when they're
eating carbs and you'll see a good
impact on their glucos levels okay so
I'm mixing it like this you didn't put
much in there I put a tablespoon it's a
tablespoon and even that small amount
you L it looked like you you kind of
filled the lid I fill the lid twice
basically which is approximately one
tablespoon I think cuz this is probably
like yeah this is half a tablespoon I
would say okay I've done this
before and now you can't taste
anything you're telling me that that
will have an impact absolutely and the
studies prove it I can't taste anything
yeah maybe because I just had the big
shot I think that's probably why but but
totally Stephen I even meet people on
the street or like my readers and stuff
and they'll show me that in their purse
they have a little um bottle of vinegar
they take with them it's super easy and
you know I was very skeptical and I
think everybody was super skeptical
about the vinegar thing until the
studies were widely read it's it's an
amazing ingredient that's been used for
Millennia for its health benefits but
now we understand how it works it has
impact on visceral fat on cholesterol
levels on glucose and on insulin levels
it's a magical ingredient it's super
cheap so have some vinegar but be very
careful now a lot of big brands are
jumping on this and are making vinegar
drinks that have sugar in them so you
want straight vinegar you don't want
anything that has even a tiny bit of
apple juice or sugar uhuhuh straight
vinegar
you said visceral fat yeah is that belly
fat yeah it's the fat between your
organs it's the fat that's really bad
for you so you can have fat that is sort
of on the outside of your body and you
can you can grab it you know you can
grab it and you can really pinch it
speak for yourself no I totally have
nice fat here that I can grab yeah yeah
so this fat you know I can grab visceral
fat is underneath my muscle layer and
you would know if somebody has visceral
fat if they have kind of a big hard
belly have you ever seen that and they
just kind of but if you touch it you
can't make it into a roll that's
visceral fat that's between your organs
and that's really bad for you so vinegar
helps of course this is not a magic
solution that's going to fix all your
issues and you know prevent ton of
diseases it's a good Ally to have and
I'm all about little allies you bring
with you Gentle Giants you have
throughout your day that are going to
help you get to Health in an easy
manageable way so so if I have that
glass that you've just made for me which
basically I can't taste the vinegar in
because it's been dilated by water and
then I eat something yeah remind me
again of the impact that that will have
on my glucose Spike so it'll reduce your
glucose Spike by up to 30% and your
insulin Spike also by up to 30% the way
it works is that you have these little
scissors in your stomach like miniature
scissors called enzymes their job is to
chop up the starches and sugars and turn
them into individual glucose molecules
it's a part of your digestive process
these enzymes
do this
job vinegar will temporarily inactivate
some of those little scissors
essentially slowing down how quickly the
glucose arrives into your bloodstream
it's all about velocity we're all about
trying to reduce the speed of arrival of
glucose into your bloodstream that's the
key so vinegar is a really effective way
of doing this one of the things that I
read online as well about glucose and
again this is like conspiracy theories
that are
I read this is a variation of the Tweet
um I'll read it out it says sugar in a
baby's brain is called ADHD sugar in
adult's brain is called dementia and
Alzheimer's sugar in your eyes is called
glycom sugar in your teeth is called
cavities sugar on your skin is called
Aging sugar in your sleep is called
insomnia sugar in your blood is called
diabetes sugar on Wall Street is called
a billion dollar industry boom I get the
point I think sugar is definitely one of
the main drivers of all these things but
there's other stuff going on of course
but I like that I think the Alzheimer's
one is really interesting to talk
about there's a study that has followed
people for 30 years and they found that
people who had elevated glucose levels
in their 40s were more likely to get
Alzheimer's when they reach 60 70 80 so
having high glucose levels at midlife is
a risk factor for Alzheimer's when
you're older not only that but
scientists have started to see that some
of the things you see in the brain of
someone with Alzheimer's are actually
similar to what you see in the body of
somebody with diabetes namely
inflammation glycation and insulin
resistance so much so that some
scientists call Alzheimer's type 3
diabetes diabetes of the
brain pretty freaking fascinating
there's going to be so many people that
are listening to our conversation when
we talked about PCOS or Alzheimer's or
all these kinds of things I think like
how how is it fair that I've got these
conditions when I don't even eat as much
sugar as most people yeah you know they
probably look at someone who is really
binging out on sugar who doesn't have
any of these things if I was a woman and
I had PCOS and I ate just a little bit
of sugar I'd be like this is not fair
and a second ago when you said at 40 if
you have elevated gluc glucose levels is
that relative to like or is that to your
response no they're looking at fasting
glucose so a measure of a how diabetic
you are essentially if you're healthy
pre-diabetic or diabetic so it's not
looking at the spikes it's looking at
your Baseline in the morning which is
what doctors measure with a blood test
oh okay yeah yeah but Stephen life is
unfair like I
my glucose spikes led to terrible mental
health episodes of depersonalization
lots of people I know eat so much sugar
all the time have never had one mental
health issue in their life I like I
don't have all the answers to that we
just know that on average if you look at
everybody by reducing those spikes
you're going to reduce the likelihood of
these diseases but you see people who
like smoke two packs of cigarettes a day
drink two liters of orange juice and
live to 120 with no health issues and
you have people who are perfectly
healthy who get cancer at 25 and die
like I'm not God I don't know but what I
do know is that in a lot of cases when
you have a condition that's linked to
glucose levels and you apply these hacks
you can get relief or remission that's
all I know are there any societies where
they just don't really eat sugar that
you you can think of or any sort of I
think any any culture any country that's
been globalized and now has access to
like fizzy drinks and stuff it's so
addictive that stuff as soon as you
introduce it somewhere everybody starts
drinking it I'd love to do a continuous
glucose monitor on like the heads a
tribe or something in Africa and see
amazing if they're like inflammation
levels and stuff yeah I would do
continous glucose monitor but also
fasting glucose levels right to just
kind of see what their Baseline is at do
any of them have diabetes pre-diabetes
or not at all what's going on but yeah I
agree it's fascinating you mentioned a
term earlier that I've only ever heard
used when talking about a zmek glp1 yeah
what what relationship does glucose have
with gp1s and what the hell is a
glp1 it's so interesting so
in your digestive system you have these
little cells they're called L cells and
they're like little sensors and they
just hang out there in your digestive
tract just like chilling and doing
nothing and then as soon as you eat and
they sense food they wake up they're
like alert we have a job to do and their
job is to release a substance called
glp1 this
substance then goes to different parts
of your body and tells you that you've
eaten enough food and you can stop
eating so for example you're having a
big plate of
pasta the starch goes into your
digestive system the little L cells
sense the pasta they're like oh we've
eaten food and then it tells your brain
Stephen you can stop eating you don't
have to eat another five pounds of pasta
you're satiated M and you become less
hungry not only that but glp1 also helps
your body deal with that glucose spike
it says alert glucose is here let's put
some of that glucose away into liver
muscle and fat cells so glp1
is a totally normal part of our
physiology it's been there forever we
all have it but recently it's been kind
of
um just taking advantage of so there
were scientists and Pharma companies who
said hey this gp1 thing is pretty cool
what happens if we give somebody 10
times 20 times a 100 times more glp1
than they naturally have what what's
going to happen Let's test that so they
did that and what happened was people's
glucose levels started decreasing a lot
because remember gp1 puts glucose away
second impact people stopped
eathing they were not hungry anymore
they appetite Zapped gel1 is a very
powerful appetite suppressant especially
when you have it in massive doses so the
fmer companies were like huh this is
going to be a helpful drug and first it
was just for people with diabetes okay
to reduce your glucose levels now it's
been used for weight loss
basically throughout the world it's so
popular and you might think oh Jilin is
so cool it's helping people lose weight
for me Stephen I'm like guys do you
realize what's going on do you realize
that we've had to invent a drug to
prevent people from eating the food
around them because the food around them
is so toxic that it's making them sick
it's as if we found out that top water
was toxic and killing us and instead of
fixing the top water being toxic we
invented a drug that made you less
thirsty
how messed up is that that we need this
drug today to protect us from the food
around us because the food around us is
causing so many issues so that's my
little soap box
but the glp1 drugs are really
interesting because they cut people's
appetite so people lose a lot of weight
there's a few problems with those first
up to 40% of the weight that is lost is
actually muscle mass they're not drugs
that just make you lose fat you lose
cells from everywhere in your body and
muscle is really important for longevity
for health for your glucose levels and
then when people stop taking these drugs
on average they they gain back 70% of
the weight that they lost and they don't
gain back muscle they gain back fat so
if you're on one of these drugs you can
actually end up in a worse situation
when you stop taking it so if you're on
one of these weight train three times a
week eat a lot of protein to make sure
you're not not losing too much muscle
mass and I see this everywhere some
people they just need this stuff because
they're so stuck in a cycle of not
having access to good food and in a in a
cycle of um of Crisis essentially their
body is really broken they're really
sick and they just need a way out but to
me it's
um it's wild that we got to this
point are you saying that you're not a
fan of people taking a zenek or are you
saying that you're not a fan of the
environment that has caused the need or
rise in I'm not a fan of the fact that
we today need this to save people's
lives because the food system is so
toxic and messed up that the only
solution is to stop people from eating
the food around them what's the solution
though is it is the solution you're
proposing that the government regulates
food more harshly yeah I think it's it's
regulation it's also you know these big
food companies the food industry they
need to be making money right they need
to make sure their shareholders are
happy and the problem is most of them
make toxic products that are full of
sugar but they would love to make
products that are lower in sugar people
don't like the lower in Sugar products
we have it's just like a systemic issue
we have to all fix together we either
have to say okay all food companies
nobody's allowed to put more than x
amount of sugar in any product ever and
then we have to educate people and tell
them hey anytime there's sugar in a
product that's dessert that's not real
food we have to give people access to
food so many people live in food deserts
and all they have is soda and processed
frozen meals it's it's a
global complicated complicated problem I
don't have the answer to it but but I'm
hoping that people are waking up and
trying to make change happen I was
listening to a conversation this morning
funly enough in the shower and in part
of the podcast they said um there was
one of the hosts who was trying to frame
it as this kind of like sugar conspiracy
theory yeah and this like processed food
cons conspiracy theory where like big
farmer like all in on it and there's
like these evil people in this like
Tower or whatever and then it was
rebutted by the other host who basically
made the case which I kind of believe
that actually it's not necessarily this
big conspiracy theory it's really a case
of incentives like commercial incentives
and he explained that one of the leading
soda brands that we all know in drink
the probably the most famous in the
world they basically ran a study where
they put um different amounts of sugar
into their drink to see what sold the
most and the scientists there put like
30 grams in 40 grams in 50 gr 60 gram in
some people loved 30 gram some people L
60 grams of sugar but the thing that
resulted in the highest sell through of
this drink that we all know of was like
42 g of sugar so that's what they went
with absolutely and again like it sounds
really really evil but when you just
break something down to the incentives a
company has a key kpi and okr and a
metric of make more money they are
publicly listed they've got investors
they don't make more money they die so
that's their incentive and if they find
out that 42 grams of sugar in a drink is
going to result in that goal being met
then that's what they're going to do
totally St
I used to think when I was younger that
diabetes was sort of invented by the
food industry and the Pharma industry
because when you think about it like
it's a perfect disease because when you
have di diabetes is caused by eating too
much crap food over too long and then
once you have diabetes instead of saying
hey stop the crap food they just give
you medication that allows you to keep
eating the crap food and manage your
condition and then you need more
medication and you're eating more crap
food and then you die so I thought this
is like the perfect conspiracy if big
food and big Pharma were like how are we
going to make the mov money possible but
actually it's way more complicated than
that it's it's it's a very tough
situation I don't have the answer but
I'm hoping that in my lifetime we see
some progress because I really do
believe that the people in these
companies they want to do better they
want they don't want people to die they
don't want people to get sick but they
also have to make sure that the
company's making money so how do you
bridge those two that's really
interesting question I don't know how to
say this you in a way that you're going
to understand but perfect head is
banging I'm an investor in the company I
drink K every day the whole team drinks
perfect Ted every day we have a perfect
Ted fridge in the office here's why I
like perfect Ted typical energy drinks
used to give me these crashes and as a
podcaster the last thing you want to do
is be crashing in a conversation the
founders of perfect Ted wanted to create
an energy drink that wouldn't create
that horrible crash cycle that many of
us go through so they used matcha as the
energy source and somehow they also made
it really really delicious they've just
come out with this new flavor called
juicy Peach and it is banging if you try
perfect TS juicy Peach and it's not
banging feel free to get in my DMs and
cuss me out you can pick it up at tesos
or waos or you can get it online and
here's a secret that you've got to keep
to yourself I'm going to give you 40%
off perfect Ted just so you can try
juicy Peach yourself go to perfect
ted.com and at checkout put in the code
diary 40 I'm going to leave that up for
some time not forever that's perfect
ted.com and then use code diary 40 at
checkout when you try it make sure you
tag me on Instagram and and say Steve
you were right it's banging you are
going to want to hear this message from
a brand sponsor spoiler someone's going
to have the opportunity to win 10,000
000 you've heard me ask over 300 guests
about their purpose you've heard me ask
them what is your why and how they're
building their lives and businesses
around it but how are you building yours
if you're not living according to your
own why you're probably living according
to someone else's I designed the
manifesto method with Adobe Express to
help people especially business owners
reconnect with their values a lot of
people including myself in most of my
life aren't clear on what are why is but
we all know that it's so important
because it's the North Star it's our
Compass it's our guide through this
chaos that we call Life click the link
in the description to find an
introduction to this method and some
easy to use templates to create your own
personal Manifesto I'll select my
favorite to receive
£10,000 and an invite to an exclusive
event with me you're why done your way
and I'm excited to see it what about
menopause interested in this I've talked
a lot on this podcast about menopause
but is there any link between glucose
glucose spikes and menopause yeah so
unfortunately once you go through men
menopause your glucose response to the
same food becomes higher so your body is
less good I know you're making a sad
face I know it's difficult you your
glucose levels naturally increase your
glucose spikes naturally increase what I
have found in the studies which is
interesting is that in females going
through menopause when you reduce the
amount of sugar in the diet and reduce
their glucose spikes you do get some
relief from your symptoms whether it's
in insomnia hot flashes you do see that
food can impact how bad of a time you
have when you go through this
process H have I depressed you no no I
just so okay so I've got the hacks I
kind of understand the impact that
glucose is having on my body now um I
guess
the it's funny because there's a whole
spectrum of people that listen there's
some people that listen to this that
will be on one side of the spectrum
where they're really struggling with
sugar maybe they're clinically obese and
maybe they just can't get out of that
that roller coaster those cravings and
it's probably somewhat emotional yeah
there probably some kind of trauma there
or something maybe there's a genetic
predisposition or whatever but for those
people like I I I don't know I don't
know what what to offer them really like
what what can I offer them what can we
offer them so people who are stuck in a
craving cycle that are the extreme end
of the craving cycle okay so when you're
at the extreme end of the craving cycle
you are a Vic vitim to your sugar
Cravings throughout the day you'll be
like I need sugar I need sugar you go
grab it right yes this can be due to
emotional factors but also it probably
means that you're on a big glucose
roller coaster it means you're
activating that craving Center in your
brain multiple times every two
hours if before you eat something sweet
next time you have a craving if you do
one of these things either you have a
tablespoon of vinegar in water either
you have something else before it a
little bit of broccoli some cherry
tomatoes a carrot some almonds something
that's going to put some clothing on
those carbs you'll be ble to get the
dopamine from the Cravings sorry you'll
be able to get the dopamine from the
sugar with less of a spike and less of a
crash so less activation of the craving
Center in your brain and if you do this
throughout the day you're going to feel
a little bit less urge for that sweet
food I don't think we can say these
people are not going to benefit from
studying their glucose levels I think
that would be misguided you must have so
many people that message you though that
have just tried and tried and tried and
tried yeah listen for some people like
they just can't do it it's just hard for
them you know they're in a difficult
economic social relationship situation
and they just can't do the hacks right
now maybe they'll be able to in a year
but most people who try and who are able
to get their hands on savory breakfast
ingredients on vinegar on some veggies
they see really good impact and that's
what drives me
really and I guess much of what might
motivate them or give them the
discipline to stick is I mean this is
certainly the case for me is getting
really clear on why why all this stuff
matters you know I don't think humans
are particularly good at thinking too
far into the future I think we're good
at dealing with prevention is not sexy
right like if you tell somebody oh these
glucose hacks are going to be good for
you so you prevent Alzheimer's like
nobody really cares unless you have a
parent with Alzheimer's but this stuff
not only does it help you long term but
even just forget about that it will help
you feel better today have fewer
cravings for sugar today have more
energy today to go and get your to-do
list done sleep better tonight that's
the stuff that motivates people and it's
easy Stephen it's easy Savory breakfast
vinegar veggie star
movement it's easy and you feel the
impact immediately so you want to keep
going and on that point of today if I'm
doing a podcast episode and I've got I'm
sitting here for three four five hours
sometimes for somebody do you recommend
that I avoid glucose before I do the
podcast to make sure my cognitive
performance might 100% yes studies show
that when you have a big glucose Spike
for breakfast before you do a cognitive
task you are not as good on the
cognitive task as if you have steady
glucose levels because your brain also
uses glucose for energy and so it feels
the ups and the downs and the
inflammation and the glycation if you
want to really fuel your brain have a
nice savory breakfast or eat nothing if
you don't feel like eating well you said
that my my brain uses glucose for energy
so if I have a massive bowl of sugar
right before this conversation isn't my
brain going to be like no it's like your
mitochondria it's like the plant some
glucose steady supply good too much
glucose at once stress stress in your
mitochondria stress in your body too
much water at once in a plant plant dies
you want to make sure the supply is is
nice and steady the variation is what
causes
issues um you gave me this blue tube
that's in front of me what is this it
says anti-spike
formula I can't even pronounce it that's
not English oh did I give you a French
you give me aen French one okay in
English it should
say makes the glucose Spike of carbs and
sugar up to 40%
smaller what is it okay it's like It's
So for anybody that's just listening on
audio it's this little jar of tablet
little
capsules um on each capsule it says
anti-spike half of the capsule is green
the other half of it is this sort of
like beige color and it's got a powder
in each capsule um the 60 capsules in
this little jar mhm what is it this is
just me
putting some Cutting Edge signs into
capsules so people can use it
so there have been two big scientific
realizations that I wanted to share with
people the first one has to do with glp1
so you know those little cells that are
sensing food and that produce gp1 in
your body that I was
mentioning
nice there's a molecule in lemon look at
me look at you st who would have thought
who would have thought look at us there
you go the glucose goddess
himself drinking vinegar in this hand
anti- Spike formula in this hand we're
going to live forever you're going to
live forever we're going to live forever
I really want to live until like 150
mostly because I want to see if they
find aliens anyway that's a sidebar so
do you know what me I just did that did
you recognize it where that that guy
guys I think it's hot ones and I like
look at us look at us look at us who
thought you're you're perfect Stephen
I'm so proud of you wait wait so I want
to tell you this because it's really
cool so you know lemons they're really
yellow yeah okay so the reason they're
yellow is because of the substance
called aroc citrin it's an antioxidant
it's really good aroc citrine has been
discovered by scientists to be really
good at increasing the amount of gp1
your little L cells make so on the one
hand you have like extreme Pharma drugs
giving you way too much gp1 and then on
this side you have natural stuff that
can naturally increase gp1 which helps
your glucose levels your cravings and
your satiety so this lemon molecule
arrine if you have enough of it it's
going to increase the amount of gp1 your
cells produce the thing is Stephen you
need to have a lot of it you need to
drink like one and a half liters of
lemon juice per day to get enough to
impact your cells or you can extract it
and you can concentrate and that's what
I've done and put into anti-spike so
this is a really cool natural molecule
that I want people to have access to to
do the natural gp1 increase so this
could low glucose Spike by up to 40% so
the the lemon extract doesn't do the
glucose spike it does the glp1 thing the
other thing that I've put in anti-spike
is an extract from mulbury Leaf so
mulbury Leaf contains a molecule called
D NJ super cool molecule when you have
it before a meal it goes and it
interacts with with those little
scissors I was telling you about that
vinegar acts on and it prevents up to
40% of the glucose in your meal from
being absorbed into your bloodstream so
it just cuts by 40% the glucose
absorption just the glucose it doesn't
cut the vitamins the protein the
minerals nothing so I've put these two
amazing scientific discoveries into this
bottle with the best quality extracts
Etc because they were not on the market
and I wanted people to have access to
them again you can just do the food
hacks you don't need this but if you
want supplement health
don't go for burin don't go for vinegar
capsules this is what you need what is
uh what is the most important thing we
haven't spoken about that you think we
should have um there's a new study that
I wanted to mention on depression which
I think is really interesting that has
followed people for 10 years so it
followed 300 people none of them had
insulin resistance or depression at the
beginning of the study and insulin
resistance as I explained is just a
consequence of lots of glucose spikes
over a long time they follow these
people for 10 years they found that in
the people who developed insulin
resistance within those 10 years there
was almost a twofold increase in the
development of major depression as well
so insulin resistance is correlated to
major depressive disorder not saying
it's causing it but for me the
connection between glucose and mental
health is truly fascinating and as you
know and we discussed on our previous
episode that's the reason I got into
this in the first place and seeing more
studies come out like this linking the
two
I think we're going to learn so much in
the next few years I mean I think as you
were saying that I was thinking about
you know if I have a high glucose diet
then it has a ton of Downstream
consequences one of which is like my
sleep is going to be terrible if my
sleep is terrible I'm probably going to
be more likely to be depressed yeah
absolutely do you think much about sleep
in glucose has anyone ever I do yeah
there are some studies showing that if
you go to bed after dinner that that has
caused a big glucose Spike you're going
to have have less restorative deep sleep
and for me if I go to bed with a big
rcos bike at dinner in the morning I
wake up and I'm so hungry it's always
like I inevitably if my dinner causes a
big spike I'm hungry as soon as I wake
up like gargling hunger so I think sleep
and food are more related than we think
and then if we're tired our glucose
spikes will be higher the next day which
means we'll have more Cravings because
if your body's tired it can't manage
glucose as effectively in fact another
study I want to mention which is really
cool so you're a coffee drinker now M
Coffee in some people causes glucose
Pikes even black coffee because of the
stress response have you ever seen a
glucose bike from coffee I've not looked
okay
then then let's hope you don't but in
some people it causes a spike especially
in people who feel a bit jittery and
anxious when they drink coffee here's
the study it showed that if you if
you're tired and you didn't sleep well
you should drink your coffee after your
breakfast instead of before four and it
can cut the glucose Spike of your coffee
by up to
50% and also I think it makes sense from
a cortisol standpoint if you're
exhausted and you just have a bunch of
coffee first thing when you wake up it
might be a lot for your body to handle
so even black coffee can cause the
glucose yeah in some people yeah in me
it never caused it uh didn't prevent me
from becoming way too addicted to coffee
but in some people it caused a spike
yeah have you stopped drinking coffee
did you say yeah 31 days ago tracking
the day really why yeah because it was a
habit that I was dependent on but that
didn't serve me and I knew this for
years every time I had a coffee I then
didn't feel so good and I was like why
did I drink that coffee it just the
crash is really intense for me my brain
is very sensitive to stuff so it would
just make me have a bit of brain fog I
would not think Super clearly but yet
every night when I went to bed I would
be dreaming about my flat white in the
morning and it was something I really
wanted to solve and I don't know why you
know a month ago I was drinking coffee I
was like that's it that's the last one
for a while and then I didn't have one
the next day or the next day and then
after 5 days you just don't even want it
anymore and what have you noticed since
you've stopped drinking coffee it's so
much easier for me to fall asleep at
night like I just I just get in bed and
within 10 minutes I'm asleep whereas
before I would think and be in bed and
just you know think about stuff have
lots of thoughts and just spend an hour
awake essentially and then my brain
works better I don't have those big
bursts of energy where I would get super
productive and like get all my [__] done
but I feel more consistent throughout
the day and I feel more like myself I
think that's the biggest part and I feel
proud of myself for having done this I
know it's not a huge deal but for me it
meant a lot I've been trying to drive
this coffee conspiracy for so long and
no one will take it what's the
conspiracy I just think it's hailed as
this like super food and this super um
super drink that really has no impact on
us other than if we drink it past 12:00
then it's going to impact our sleep
because life of its 12 hours so but I
just think like something that has such
a big clear positive impact or at least
in the short term of productivity Focus
um that people are so dependent on in
culture must be at
somewhere having equal and opposite cost
what's weird is that all the studies
show that people who drink more coffee
have fewer diseases I know it's like so
weird how could this be because I I live
by principle that everything has like an
equal and opposite cost I think that's
like Einstein's theory of relativity or
whatever i' totally butched that cuz I
have no idea about anything to do
physics but just this idea that you
can't isn't it like e equal MC squ where
it's you basically I don't know even
what I'm talking about look at me mass
and energy yeah like you can't destroy
every Force has an opposite effect equal
an opposite effect and so with coffee
okay if it brings me really really up
and it really makes me focused and
productive then there must be an equal
and opposite downside maybe the downside
is just you spend a lot of money on it I
don't know but it can't be that's like
it's not like a find out it's got to be
there's got to be listen maybe it's just
one of those things that's actually not
too bad for us I don't know I think one
of the downsides is that people often
put a lot of stuff in their coffee like
sugar oat milk things that are not good
for you you know oat milk is pasta juice
anybody listening o milk is not good for
you it's just starch so maybe that's the
downside I don't know no I don't don't
believe it it's got to be you know again
looking at all the studies longevity
Health disease weight loss you know
everything it says
the super thing um but maybe we're not
focusing don't you think it disconnects
you a little bit from yourself maybe
that's the downside that you're you're
less grounded you're less in your body
you're a bit less authentic to you you
get a bit more like supercharged yeah
supercharged maybe that's why maybe
that's the downside maybe it is maybe
people just value the downside totally
because in our society we love this
stuff we love just being in our brain
and having a big Todo
list how are you dealing with all this
attention I'm in a good place now but it
was really tough cuz I'm such a
sensitive person um at the beginning I
had no idea what I was doing I had like
a Google alert set for my name and I was
getting things every day yeah and nobody
teaches you how to deal with this stuff
true you have to learn the hard way yeah
so now now I protect protect myself you
know I don't read anything and my team
filters stuff to me that's important and
uh all in all like the the quote unquote
attention I just keep coming back to the
fact that you know I believe in what I'm
doing it's helpful it's easy I see proof
every every day that it's helping people
it's scientific it makes me happy and so
all the noise you know all the haters
and stuff you just kind of it's part of
the package I guess I think you're all
you know having met you and spoken to
you for a long time on and off we go way
back now tell me about it um you are one
of the most well-intentioned pure
wonderful people I have ever met and in
fact when I when I saw that we were
having this conversation today I think
often times it's a good gauge of the
person because I was really just excited
it was like expansive knowing that you
were coming here because you're such a
beautiful soul and human and so anybody
writing bad things about you I just
think just doesn't understand who you
are as a person and that's okay we
forgive thanks Stephen so kind of you to
say we have um a closing TR on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're leaving it
for and the question that's been left
for you is tell us about an occasion
that comes to mind when complete
stranger did a surprising Act of great
kindness to oh yeah I know
exactly it was a year and a half ago I
was in London and it was just before
this book was coming out and I was in a
phase
where you know when you get burnt out
and it's just a lot and I was like why
am I doing this I just I just want to
quit and I got into a black cab stepen
and the driver I think he was an angel
or something he just looked in the
mirror and looked at me and started
saying that was going to make me cry he
just looked at me and he said whatever
you're doing it's
important he just said that and he just
said whatever you're doing it's
important like keep going and it's so
crazy that this stuff happens there was
the universe sending me a message or
something he was definitely like I don't
know yeah that really stuck with me
because it really felt like a and I'm a
very spiritual person it really felt
like a
message from the Spirits you know trying
to help me in this difficult moment so
it was not so much a personal thing
somebody did but it was something that
someone channeled that like really
impacted me why did it matter so much at
that
moment oh because I go through ups and
downs it's hard you know it's hard to
drive this idea this project by myself
and to manage all the people and to care
so much about the placement of the
[__] broccoli on the cover of the
book and it's just it's a lot it's a lot
of stuff that I care about so deeply and
sometimes it's just it just eats at you
it's so much it's so much and I think it
mattered to me so much when he said that
because it felt like okay there's
something going on that is beyond what
we understand beyond what science
understands this was a message from the
universe this person had I didn't say a
word Stephen I didn't say a [__] word
and he said that to
me yeah I mean it's what I took from
what you said is just how a total
stranger sing a couple of words can
really have such a tremendous impact
like I interpret it as like a message
from God but actually whatever maybe he
says that to everybody maybe but
regardless of the fact there's something
so beautiful about how you never really
know at any given moment what anyone's
going through and just a couple of
well-placed words can have such a
profound impact in just imagine like so
say the this is exaggerating the
scenario slightly but you were really
going to quit yeah and him saying those
couple of words someone that has no idea
whatsoever
pushed you to carry on on your mission
and pushing you to carry on on your
mission saves thousands and thousands
and thousands of people's lives and
extends their health span and all it was
was a couple of words wild and all of
that's going on at all times in our
society and we don't even know the sort
of butterfly effect of the impact it's
having on people but we can bet on the
fact that it's just better to be kind
exactly and we can bet on the fact that
if we want to say something nice to
somebody we should you know when you see
somebody in the street on crutches or
whatever just say like get well soon
that kind of [__] is powerful just see
them you know it's just being seen I
think which is so powerful because you
get into your own
head Jesse thank you thank you so much
I'm very very excited by your anti-
Spike formula very very excited and my
partner is going to be thrilled when I
bring this home so thank you for that
and I highly recommend because this book
is so beautiful and it's been such a
Smash Hit um all around the world I
think it sold what more than three
million copies or something staggering
like that so congratulations and all
your success long may it continue and I
have to say what you're doing is
important so please do keep on doing it
thank you you're going to make me cry
again you're the worst you always make
me cry no I don't do anything what are
you talking about you always give me
bodyy vineger thank you Stephen wor
thank you so much thank you for being
here I appreciate you thank
you isn't this cool every single
conversation I have here on the dire of
a CE at the very end of it you'll know I
asked the guest to leave a question in
the Diary of a CEO and what we've done
is we've turned every single question
written in the Diary of a CEO into these
conversation cards that you can play at
home so you've got every guest we've
ever had their question and on the back
of it if you scan that QR code you get
to watch the person who answered that
question we're finally revealing all of
the questions and the people that
answered the question the brand new
version two updated conversation cards
are out right now at Theon conversation
cards.com theyve sold out twice
instantaneously so if you are interested
in getting hold of some limited edition
conversation cards I really really
recommend acting quickly
[Music]
m